---
layout: post
category: example
---

### Agency, Divinity, and The Self in *Paradise Lost*

#### An Analysis of Satan (Book IV, 33-114) and Eve’s (Book IX, 795-833) Soliloquies



Milton’s *Paradise Lost* is filled with great scenes of rhetoric and persuasion between God and fallen angels alike. The devils debate how best to wage war on Heaven at the start of Book II, and God, the Son, and the Heavenly Host discusses Man’s eventual fall in Book III. Milton masterfully conducts his orchestra of characters to advance the moral movement of the poem, and he portrays these intensely visual moments of persuasion with dramatic fanfare. Yet Milton gives his most moving speeches and compelling arguments to the conversations characters have with themselves in moments of conflict and agony. We find Satan wrestling with his own wretchedness as his eyes prey upon a yet untainted Eden at the end of Book IV, and Eve likewise reckons with her newfound power in the wake of her sin – eating the Forbidden Fruit. Is God present in one’s relationship to oneself? To wield agency over oneself is agonizing and frightful, but Milton nevertheless renders free will as a location of divinity within both Satan and Eve. For both characters, their relationship with God mediates their relationship with the self. As Satan and Eve agonize over their past wrongs, each is brought to face the immense agency they wield over the future: Satan, to repent or to sin further; Eve, to confess to Adam or reign over him. In Satan and Eve’s self-introspection, Milton portrays the capacity to choose as a trial of the self.

As Satan beholds the sight of Eden at the start of Book IV, Milton suspends him in a moment of solitude where he reckons with his yet unfinished fall. While Milton previously portrays Satan as an uniquely pugnacious devil whose rebellion is at once tyrannical and cruel, Milton leaves the task of moralizing the war against Heaven to Satan himself. At the beginning of his speech, Satan seems to be confounded by his own Fall: his service to God merely required him to “afford him praise” (46) and “pay him thanks” (47). Indeed, the prideful Satan attributes his fall to his excellence and ambition: “O had his powerful destiny ordained / Me some inferior angel” (59), Satan would have been “happy” to serve in Heaven, without “unbounded hope” and “raised / Ambition” (61). Milton introduces Satan’s desire for power as a motivation, but complicates the moral simplicity of this motivation with Satan’s perception of Heavenly servitude as as simple and joyless. It is precisely Satan’s tyrannical nature that prevents him from deriving moral character or joy from his relationship to God. Satan characterizes his servitude to God as a strategic submission instead of a moral submission, thus “all his good proved ill in Satan.”(48) The prideful Satan consumes his angelic agency: he is not bound by duty or repentance, he is only moved by a desire for power.

In Satan’s rejection of his servitude to God, Milton nevertheless retains an aspect of his character that is remorseful and passive – a regretful Satan who suffers the curse of his own pride and sin. This aspect of Satan emerges in opposition to his bellicose self and renders him a skeptic to his own conquests, arguing that his “stained subjection” (50) to God is nevertheless a “debt immense of endless gratitude”(53). The remorseful Satan recognizes that his servitude to God is inseparable from God’s kindness to him: a “burdensome” (54) and continuous debt that he is “still paying, still to owe” (55). The reader may question the moral ambivalence that Milton imbues in the metaphor of “debt”: if Satan’s regret is sincere, why does he continue to see his relationship to God through a transactional lens? Indeed, Milton raises the profoundly regretful Satan against himself, questioning his own capability with equal taunt and defiance that he questions God: “Hadst thou the same free will and power to stand?” (66) Satan aspires to God’s omnipotence, but Milton implies that his regretful aspect knows that his ambition deprives him of the very divinity he seeks. If Satan can indeed “stand unshaken” (64) “to all temptations armed,” (65) does he thus have grounds to accuse “Heav’ns free love dealt equally to all?” (69)

Presently, the regretful Satan blames the prideful Satan’s free will for their shared “eternal woe.” (70): “against his thy will / Chose freely what it now so justly rues” (70) Yet Milton places Satan on the verge of another choice as the sight of Eden looms before him: “Which way shall I fly” (75)? Whether to repent to God, or enter Eden and fall towards still a “lower deep?” (76) Shall his ambition preside over repentance, if repentance risks “infinite wrath” (74) but the cost of ambition is “infinite despair” (74) ? The scale and grandeur of Satan’s parallel language captures his ambivalence. Satan’s fear of God’s judgement and his loath of servitude at once compels him to ambition, yet prevents him from enjoying the fruits of his conquest – this aporia is precisely “the Hell within him.” (20)

Satan cannot bear God’s “love accursed”. (69) He “recoils / Upon himself” (17) yet cynically rejects the possibility of repentance, asserting that “never can true reconcilement grow” (98) from “the wounds of deadly hate” (99). Milton provides no resolution for Satan’s struggle save for a few reluctant “farewells” to “hope, fear, remorse” (104): ambition has won over, and “all good to me is lost.” (109) Milton reorients Satan’s moral compass as one that explicitly inverts God’s goodness (“Evil be thou my good” (110)), and the remorseful Satan disappears into his ambition to equal God in power. At the end of his self-contention, Satan returns to himself a tyrant, devoid of divinity and goodness. 

Satan enters Eden and successfully tempts Eve to eat the Forbidden Fruit in Book IX, after which Eve must also contend with her own newfound capacity to choose. Unlike Satan, who has always wielded angelic agency, Eve’s newfound human agency is a consequence of her fall to temptation. When Eve proclaims that “I grow mature / in Knowledge” (804), one could argue this “Knowledge” to be her sense of self. At first, Milton’s Eve is purely defined by her relationships to others. Eve originates from Adam’s rib and is beholden to him as he is beholden to her, as both mentor and husband, while God is their Father and angels their shepherd. Just as Eve was tempted by her own image in her memory of her creation in Book IV, her newfound agency bids her to examine her own human complexity: “I perhaps am secret.” (811) Eve is ignorant of her fallibility and ecstatic in her knowledge, praising “Experience, next to thee I owe” (808) to be a “Best guide” (808) and unaware of the weight of human agency. In contrast to her previously gentle and pious temperament, Eve speaks of God in glaringly blasphemous terms as “Our great Forbidder” (815), whose angels are “spies” (815) and fill her with disdain. God retreats to the background of Eve’s considerations as Heaven becomes “High and remote” (812): all she perceives at this moment is herself, and her power. 

Like Satan, Eve comes to view God purely for His omnipotent agency to wield power. A curious theological implication follows: if both Satan’s angelic agency and Eve’s human agency are mimicries of God’s powers, then how does Milton reconcile the divinity within Satan and Eve with their agency? Indeed, when Milton’s God is as impersonal as He is omnipresent, one could hardly blame Satan and Eve for seeing Him as nothing but a wielder of power. Yet when we speak of divinity, we speak of the image of God contained within all angels and humans alike in their servitude to Him. Where does this divinity lead Satan and Eve? Could human or angelic agency reinforce this innate divinity, rather than corrupt it? To possess divinity, therefore, is to possess the capacity of a moral choice – and choosing the Good. To contemplate one’s capacity to choose is to contemplate the temptation of power. For both Satan and Eve, the power that lies in their individual agency directly defines their relationship to God. 

Eve is certainly tempted by power. She contemplates concealing the truth from Adam, and thus using her “Knowledge” to reign over him. Whereas Satan is motivated by dominion, any direct reference to power is absent in Eve’s rhetoric. In particular, she recognizes that she could exercise a feminine power over Adam: this would give her “the more to draw his love / And render me more equal” (824). Instead, Eve becomes concerned with her own freedom and equality. She ponders whether she would lose her newfound freedom should she concede to Adam: “for inferior who is free?” (827) Echoing Satan’s characterization of an “inferior angel”, Eve mistakes power for freedom, just as Satan mistakes power for morality.

All ambition bears cost, and ungodly power consumes those who wield it. Fortunately, Eve comes to realize that her power is easily thwarted by God, who is omnipotent. It is the authority of God that deters Eve from her decision to reign over Adam. In fact, it is the image of “another Eve” (828) that frightens Eve. She fears the unknowability of Death, and the replacement of her that would follow. That she could die and Adam would “Live with [another Eve] enjoying” (829) is a potent and complex image, filled with Eve’s fear, envy, and love for Adam. As Eve panics towards self-preservation and survival, she realizes that the love between herself and Adam dominates her desire for power: “With him all deaths I could endure, without him live no life” (840). She resolves to confess her sin to him, and Adam will come to decide to share her fate. Although Eve fell prey to Satan’s temptation, Milton implies that she redeems herself in this confession. While Eve’s decision does not prevent Adam’s fall, it grants Adam agency over his own fate – an agency he exercises from the basis of his love for Eve. Although Milton does not absolve Eve of her sins, her confession and submission to Adam strengthens their love and makes their fall gentler.

As Milton suspends his characters in moments of guilt and ambivalence, he articulates the presence of God in every act of free will. Both Satan and Eve, though fallen, nevertheless retain God’s image and divinity within themselves through their capacity to choose. Ultimately, Milton’s construction of free will as divine trial is a moral calling. To exercise agency is to come face to face with the divinity within oneself. Satan’s choice towards moral corruption is precisely why he will never equate God in power; Eve’s decision to confess reflects how humanity may redeem its sins through repentance towards God. At each choice one is given the chance to channel the image of God, to be as just and excellent as He is with His power. 